---
slug:              "hyperion"
title:             "Hyperion"
authors:           "Dan Simmons"
goodreads_id:      "77566"
img:               "https://images.gr-assets.com/books/1405546838l/77566.jpg"
excerpt:           ""
tags:
  - aaa-Dan-Simmons
  - bbb-sf
  - bbb-omiljene-knjige
published: false
---

Nema šale sa Simmonsom, već u prologu baca čitaoca u vatru i bez milosti ga zatrpava kontekstom, terminologijom, uvodi
glavne zaplete i naslućuje obrte. Ali radi to na jedan interesantan način, bez dosadne ekspozicije, tako da već nakon
prvih nekoliko strana čitalac može da zna da se priča odvija u dalekoj budućnosti gde su se ljudi proširili na brojne
planete koje kruže oko udaljenih zvezda. Taj "civilizovani" svet objedinjuje Hegemonija, telo nalik korporaciji kojom 
upravlja senat na čelu sa CEO-om. Unutrašnji sistemi su povezani u Worldweb, sistem koji omogućuje trenutno putovanje
bez "gubitka vremena". Te tačke povezivanja zovu se *farcaster*-i, i njihova konstrukcija je veoma skupa i složena i
zahteva da se oprema relativističkom brzinom odnese na krajnju tačku i tamo postavi.
 
Do udaljenijih sistema putuje se svemirskim brodovima koje pogone *Hawking drive*-ovi koji ostvaruju relativističke 
brzine, tj. posledica puta je razlika u vremenu koje prođe onimna na brodu u odnosu na one na planetama ("*time debt*").

Iako putovanje svemirskim brodovima brzinom većom od brzine svetlosti nije moguće, komunikacija ipak jeste, putem *fatline*-a
koji uz veliki utrošak energije odašilje *FTL burst*.

Na površini planete na kojoj nema inteligentnog života, u buci oluje koja besni i krika reptila iz okolne možvare, u 
luksuznom i tehnološki naprednom svemirskom brodu, jednako sofisticirani Konzul sedi, svira Rahmanjinova i pije viski. U
tome ga prikida poruka koja preko fatline-a iz daleka stiže od Meine Gladstone, poglavarke (CEO of Senate) Hegemonije.

Ona ga obaveštava o teškoj trenutnoj situaciji: na udaljenoj planeti Hyperion, koja je izvan Worldweba, nalaze se neke
Vremenske grobnice (*Time Tombs*) oko kojih u sve širim krugovima tumara misteriozno čudovište Šrajk (Shrike) i nagoveštava
njihovo skoro otvaranje i otkrivanje misterija koje kriju.

U isto vreme, ka Hyperionu se u velikom broju približava roj (migration cluster) svemirskih letelica neprijatelja Hegemonije
- Ouster-a. Njihove namere nisu jasne, da li žele da otmu tajne vremenskih grobnica za sebe ili je to možda početak
invazije. Hegemonija je u nezgodno primorana da bira, da li da šalje svoju vojnu flotu u odbranu Hiperiona a da ostale
svetove ostavi nebranjenima.

Konzul, koji je proveo 11 godina u službi na Hyperionu a i sada se nalazi relativno blizu, u poziciji je da bude od koristi
Hegemoniji, i Meina Gladstone ga poziva (ne naređuje) da se pridruži još šestorici putnika na hodočaću ka vremenskim 
grobnicama. Meina ga upozorava da se sumnja da je među njima i agent Ouster-a, na šta je Konzul pomislio da ona ne zna
da li je to možda i on, ili možda sumnja a želi da ga zaplaši. Takođe nije siguran u informacije koje je upravo dobio,
da li je to istina i da li je cela istina.

Ovo sve je stalo u pet i po strana prologa, naravno, mnogo interesantnije upakovano nego što sam ja nabacao ovde.. 







This was porbably the most ambitious SF that I have read so far. 

It was a very quick and easy read for me, and when I was done with it, it left me thinking, a lot. Mostly I liked it, 
but still there are some parts that seemed out of place, but since this is only a "part one" of the story, possibly all 
will fit in place after I read Fall of Hyperion.


The setting

Some 700 years in future, "Old Earth" is long gone, destroyed hundreds of years ago in an "accident" with an artificial 
black hole. Humans have developed a very advanced AI, a means of faster then light travel, they have explored and 
seattled dozens of planets and have some other advanced technologies. 

Despite being so technologically advanced, mainstream human society is stagnant and decadent. A vast mojority of humanity 
is unified in a single social costruct, a humonguous superstate that spans tens or hundreds of light years - the Hegemony. 
The Hegemony is run more or less like a corporation, headed by a very powerful CEO who is surounded by senators from each 
of the planets, as well as AI councelors. There is some sort of a parliament (or a congress), called All-thing, with a 
speaker and a president, and if I got it right, some or all day-to-day decisions there are made in a form of a direct 
democracy (cyber participation of the citizens, vast majority of whom are uninterested for that), while CEO does the 
actual governing.

A simingly close ally of the Hegemony is a huge agglomeration of millions of advanced AI-s (TechnoCore) that seceeded 
from humanity before Old Earth was destroyed and stopped serving it as slaves, but instead it offered it's services as 
allies. Most of the high tech that Hegemony poseses was gifted to them by Technocore and human scientiests and 
techinicians are not even close to understanding how these technologies work. 

The most crucial of these gifts is the farcasting techology. Farcasters are means of instantaneous travel between two 
points in space through micro-singularities in the fabric of space-time (something like micro worm holes). About 200 
planets (that may be tens or hundreds of light years apart) are connected in such way into the Web. Farcasting is also 
used locally (as a means of a quick transport on the same planet or even within the same large building) or abused (as 
a luxury of having an apartment with rooms each one on a different planet, connected with constantly open farcast 
"portals" instead of doors).

The Hegemony is backed by a strong but not too numerous military force (called FORCE), and is happy to use it in order 
to push the outback worlds into joining the Hegemony as protectorates or full mambers of the Web.

Third major faction are the Ousters - a group of humans that have split from humanity at the time of the Big mistake and 
who now live in zero-G in fleets of space ships (called swarms) beyond the far fringes of the Hegemony territory 
ocassionaly making raids.

The Hegemony is a late 20th - early 21st century capitalism on steroirds: it is controlled by big business interests and 
backed by military. There is not much concern for ecology or sustainability and there are major inequalites between the 
Hegemony citizens, among the worlds and within the individual worlds. Some worlds are very poor and barely livable while 
others are lush and cozy. The richest of the rich have access to all kinds of luxury, to advanced life prolonging 
treatments, instantaneous interplanetary travel and advanced mind altering drugs. Average citizens on the other hand are 
iliterate, aquiring information by "downloading" it to handheld devices or if they can afford it into their minds from 
Datasphere (a sort of an advanced Internet in the book) via implants instead of recognizing written characters. They 
indulge themselves in consumerism and are immersed in mass media culture. As I already mentioned the culture and 
technology are mostly stagnant for hundreds of years.

The Ousters are said to mostly shun the technology derrived from the AIs (for example they do not use the farcasters, 
instead traveling around the galaxy in large swarms of spaceships). In comparison to the stagnant Hegemony that is only 
a direct continuation of the Old Earth humanity, the Ousters are said to have evolved both culturally and biologically.

It is quite a complex setting, but Simmons introduces it gently, practically with no exposition at all. At first, his 
use of tech terminology and names of social constructs, ranks, etc are little disorienting but very soon it becomes all 
clear enough.


The mytology and symbolysm

I recognized some of it while reading, but I had to look up most of it after I was done. There's hardly a character or 
planet name that was given randomly. Dan Simmons seems to be obsessed with 19th century English poet John Keats, so many 
names are direct or indirect references to him, people that he knew or his poems. He also draws heavily on Greek and 
Roman mythology. 

Hyperion of the Greek mythology (and in Keats' poems) was one of the Titans that formed the first pantheon of Greek 
deities. The Titans were later overthrown by Olympians, a new generation of gods. In Dan Simmons' world there is also a 
simmilar upheaval preparing to happen, and after it nothing will be the same. The Hegemony (and and people within it) 
are obviously the Titans - an old order about to be replaced by a new one. But at this point I can not tell who will 
form the new pantheon, the TechnoCore or the Ousters.



The main story arc and the inner stories

The story is told in an unconvential way. The main story arc is that of a group of pilgrims that travels to some ancient 
structures on a remote planet (Hyperion) in order to confront a powerfull and misterious entity (Shrike). Early in their 
journey they decide to start trading their life stories in order to learn more of each other in hope that the shared 
information will help them achieve their goals. I like the idea of story telling as a means of developing the characters 
and shedding some light on the Shrike mistery, it reminds me little bit of Boccaccio's Decameron. Each story is told in 
a different style - a diary, first person narrative, third person narrative, a detective story, a collection of mixed 
memories...

However, there are two things that I do not like about these stories: 

1. they are told in a very noninteractive way. For example in Joseph Conrads "Hearth of Darkness" or "End of Tether", 
there are also stories within a stories that are told by one character (a narrator) to an audience of other characters, 
but it is crafted in a much more beliveable way, seemlessly joining the outer and inner stories. Here in Hyperion it is 
more like sending emails to a group of recepients. The stories, despite some shocking revalations that would surely 
trigger instant responses from the audience, are told without interruption from start to the end, like very long monologs. 
Also, some of the stories have style that does not resemble story telling at all (with introspections, inner dialogs, 
feelings, thoughts, etc).

2. after the stories are told, they hardly illicit any response at all from other pilgrims (the exception being the last, 
consul's story). They do not discuss them much and it is as if after a person has told their story, they blend back into 
the background.



The Priest's Tale: "The Man who Cried God"

The first story is told by Lenar Hoyt, one of remaining couple of thousands priests of dwindling Roman Catholic church.

- Duré = tough
- phoenix forrest
- eternal life of Bikura
- Plato alegory of fire in the cave
- eternal life devoid of free will